Coloured by Year Chart
Description: This is a Trend Analysis Chart. Colouring of each set of bars is differentiate by "Year".
But note that the X-axis is in the form of "Month Year". This kind of bar colouring can only be done by Scripting within the Chart
This technique is beneficial when comparing data by Years


Bubble Chart
Description: This is a Bubble Chart. Its functionality is to serve as an overall view usage over a period of time.
Creating a bubble chart is easy. The hard part is how do you know how many bubbles are there within this chart?
Did you notice there's a "Bubble: 70.34%" at the top left corner in this chart? 
It simply means bubbles occupies 70.34% of the total chart, be it big or small bubble.
This calculation can only be done by Scripting
Note: The bigger the bubble, the more data count it has


Chart colour change crossing Threshold #1 & #2
Description: This is a normal bar chart. 
The only distinctive difference is that when a usage cross above "Max Occupancy" the bar will change colour. 
In this case, those above "Max Occupancy" will show Orange colour and those below Green colour
"Exceed Max Occupancy Rate" at the chart's top left corner is showing the number of bars above "Max Occupancy" in percentage
This technique can only be achieve by Scripting


Movement Chart
Description: This is a sample Movement Chart. We can trace activities by observing their movements
The plus point about this chart is, chart colour can be change by a click of a button 


Detect Duplicates Table
Description: This is a Pattern Analysis Table. It's good for detecting duplicates, 
especially when 1st transaction row is Authentic & subsequent rows are duplicates.
It can be programme only rows that are duplicates will be highlighted.
This highlighting technique can also be deploy in detecting frauds. 
Given a sets of rules, those transactions that violate these rules will be 
highlighted for further investigation


3 Dimensional Chart
Description: This is a demo of a 3 dimensional bubble chart
1st Dimension showing all Platforms
2nd Dimension showing all available Month Year
3rd Dimension counting the number of bubbles within 1 column
This is a very useful chart when you wanted to visualise 3 sets of data within 1 Chart
This can only achieve by Scripting 


Predictive Chart
Description: This is a predictive chart. The line chart in Blue are Actual trend line and the line chart in red are Predictive trend base on a
mathematic calculation
This chart is good for striking a small fortune from stock market if the Predictive formula is accurate 
This chart does not read its data from neither API, Database or Excel. Instead it's reading data from a url Table online. The whole process of 
mining data and display data in chart is fully automated


STI Financial Crisis 1987 - 2020
Description: Apart from the previous financial crisis. I expect Covid-19 recession to hit bottom with a much deeper 2nd dip than the 1st dip 
happened on 23Mar2020. The 1st dip didn't review the true colour of Covid-19 recession due to US $2 trillion stimulus package which much 
supported US ecomony. With the $2 trillion stimulus package running out over time and prolong Covid-19 pandemic, economy will again turn 
southward and dip for a 2nd time, which i expect it to happen in the 3rd quarter of 2020. Unless an effective vaccine is found before the 
2nd dip or another stimulus package greater than the 1st is introduce which i expect not likely to happen


Singapore Airline Historial Chart
Coivd-19 Recession is suppose to cause a double dip in all shares, but thanks to the rescue packages issue by the government. I'm expecting 
a Single dip for this Crisis. This time round, I'm analysing SIA is because each economy crisis only affect certain industry the most and 
this time round is the aviation industry. Just like Subprime crisis affect banks the most in 2009. I'm expecting Covid-19 vaccine to be launched
by end of 2020 and Singaporeans to get vaccinated by 1st Quarter 2021. Aviation industry will strive in 2021 and get back to pre-Covid level 
by end of 2021 instead of most Analysts predicted 2024. This is because every country is hunger for economy recovery, why would they wait for
2024 when vaccine is in hand? Based on my chart, Moving Avg Difference is moving up, showing its a good time to accumulate SIA shares now.
In Stock Market, there's always a saying, "Buy on Fear, Sell on Greed"


Singapore Airline Historial Chart 2 (Date of Analysis: 17Feb2021)
Part 2 of Singapore Airline Analysis
Note: Data of this chart is extracted from Web Scraping using Qlikview. I did not upload any data. Everything in the Chart is fully automated 
All share price here have already Incorporated Mandatory Convertible Bonds (MCB) dilution
This Chart itself contains 6 piece of information as the following
(1) This line indicate the highest price of SIA throughout the years
(2) This line indicate the lowest price of SIA throughout the years
(3) This Bar Chart is a comparison Chart. Green Colour means higher average price as compared to previous year and Red Colour vice versa
(4) This are the average price of a particular year. Formula: (Sum of all traded prices)/(No of trading days in that year) 
(5) This is my consolidated buy price $3.67
(6) Year of Trade
Analysis: Through Technical Analysis, i bought SIA shares at different times and my final consolidated buy price as $3.67
Looking forward with the roll out of vaccine, narrow loss in Q3 2020 and merger of SilkAir. SIA has becomes leaner and will becomes more 
profitable once SIA regain its traffic. I expect SIA to announce better results for its next financial statement 
Base on this Chart Analysis. I predicted 2021 SIA share price will range between $4 (Lower Limit) to $6.50 (Upper Limit) 
For the next 2 years, I predicted SIA will hover between $4.50 to $7 and will get much better into its 4th year (2024, counting 2021 as 
the 1st year)
From the lesson learned from this pandemic, I believes SIA will be more prudent in its future strategic plans




















